Thank you for the very helpful comments of the reviewers of our paper/
As requested, we have responded to all comments without adding
significant length to the paper. We have also extended our discussion of
how effective measurement of footfall is relevant to understanding the
functioning of the Smart City.

If any of what follows and what has been uploaded is unclear, please do
not hesitate to contact me.

Yours sincerely

Balamurugan Soundararaj

(on behalf also of Paul Longley and James Cheshire)

Reviewers' Comments to Author:
Reviewer: 1
This paper is about the estimation of pedestrian footfall using Wi-Fi
signal emitted by mobile devices. It deals with the problem of
estimating the footfall size based on a noisy and biased data. More
specifically it addresses the following issues that may lead to
overcounting: MAC randomization that may cause a device to generate
several MAC addresses; signals received from outside the interest zone;
unequal adoption of Wi-Fi smartphone in the population. To address this
issue, a number of techniques are introduced: clustering received signal
strength to remove device that are outside the monitored area;
clustering probes based on sequence number and timing; finally an
adjustment factor is applied to correct the estimated value. The
adjustment factor is calibrated for each location using a manual
counting. The author conducted a pilot experiment to identify the
clustering algorithms and parameters, and then they conducted a second
range of experiments at different location over an extended period of
time. During each of those experiments, ground-truth count was collected
manually. The results show that the presented approach can significantly
reduce the counting error compared to a naive solution consisting in
counting the distinct number of MAC observed. Nevertheless, there are
cases (2) where the error is still large (50%), even if in other cases
(1) the error is only of 9%.   
>>This is a correct surmisal of the remit of the paper. We have also
added material to the introduction and conclusion of the paper to better
link this remit to the Smart Cities discourse.
The idea of clustering frames using sequence number has been introduced
in [1]. This work needs to be cited when introducing the proposed
clustering algorithm.
[1] Mathy Vanhoef, Célestin Matte, Mathieu Cunche, Leonardo Cardoso,
Frank Piessens. Why MAC Address Randomization is not Enough: An Analysis
of Wi-Fi Network Discovery Mechanisms. ACM AsiaCCS, May 2016, Xi’an,
China. 2016, 
>> Thank you. We have included a citation to this source, as well as one
other recent addition to this fast-developing literature.

The author considered that the hashing of MAC address is a good way to
protect users privacy, as some MAC address collected by the device may
not be random. However hashing of MAC address cannot be considered as a
proper anonymization technique (see [2]
andhttp://webpolicy.org/2014/03/19/questionable-crypto-in-retail-analytics/ );
at best it can be considered as an obfuscation. 
[2] Levent Demir, Mathieu Cunche, Cédric Lauradoux. Analysing the
privacy policies of Wi-Fi trackers. Workshop on Physical Analytics, Jun
2014, Bretton Woods, United States. ACM, 2014
>>Thank you for pointing this out. In the revised version of the paper
we have made reference to this discussion, while also making clear that
anonymisation is ensured by the system architecture that processes and
curates the data.

There is a number of commercial solutions doing counting based on Wi-Fi
signal. Although the detail of their solution is not public, it would be
worthwhile to acknowledge their existence.
>>Thank you – this has been done.

In section 3.2, it is explained that data is divided into two sets
corresponding on random and non-random MAC. Which method is used to
perform this classification ?
>> Bala??

How was the sensor positioned compared to the area monitored used for
ground truth ? A more detailed description is required regarding the
positioning of the sensor and the size and topology of the surveyed
area.  
>> This is a good point, and is very important for our validation work.
We have included a more detailed and explicit discussion of the way that
field observation was used to calibrate and cross validate the WiFi
results.
The topic addressed in this work is interesting and timely. The proposed
approach is sound and shows promising results. The fact that the authors
conducted field experiments to evaluate their solution is a positive
point. Yet before publication, I believe that there are a number of
points that needs to be clarified or corrected.
>>Thank you very much for these very positive comments. The paper
reports on extensive methodological research and field implementation
and is, we believe, cutting edge in its findings. It also has important
implications for our understanding of the functioning of smart cities,
and these implications are discussed in greater detail in the revised
version.

Regarding the technical aspects I have a number of minor remarks: 
- "WiFi beacon technologies to access the Internet". In Wi-Fi, beacons
are management frames used by Access Point for service discovery. They
do not provide Internet access. "Wi-Fi Access Point to access ..." 

>> Thank you. We have corrected and clarified this point.
- "Wi-Fi antennae regularly broadcast a special type of signal" -> the
antenna is just the part ensuring that the signal is correctly emitted,
but it is not the source. In this context it is better to use a more
general concept and refer to the "Wi-Fi network interface" (or Wi-Fi
interface) as the the element broadcasting a signal. 
>> Thank you. Point clarified in the revised version.

- The IEEE 802.11 b/g is just a subpart of the 802.11 specification.
Here you can refer to the 802.11 specifications as a whole :
[“802.11-2012 - IEEE Standard for Information
technology–Telecommunications and information exchange between systems
Local and metropolitan area networks–Specific requirements Part 11:
Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY)
Specifications,” IEEE Std 802.11-2012 (Revision of IEEE Std
802.11-2007), pp. 1–2793, Mar. 2012.
>> Thank you. Noted and added to the revised version.

- "the first step in establishing a Wi-Fi based connection " is also
known as service discovery
>> Thank you. Added to the revised version.

- "Wi-Fi functionality has been turned off by the user", regarding this
point you may be interested in : 
-  "Media Access Control (MAC) address which is an unique identifier for
the wireless hardware of the mobile device"  The transmitter field of
the 802.11 frame can indeed contain a unique MAC address  but can also
contain a random one as noted by the author. Here it would be better to
avoid stating that the content of this field is always a unique MAC. 
>> Thank you. Again, this has been noted in the revised version of the
paper.

-  "The strength of the signal which transmitted the request.". In fact
the Received Signal Strength Indicator, a value providing an indication
on the strength of the received signal as seen by the receiver, not the
strength at the emitter side.
>> Thank you. This distinction has been noted in the revised version.

- Could you provide more information on the application used for
counting (Clicker) 
- "Though the recycling of sequence number r after 4000 leads to
multiple classifications reported on single device, the magnitude of
error is greatly reduced." This sentence is not clear. And the cycle
length is not 4000 but 4096 = 2^12.
- Regarding the issue of cycling sequence number, one could use a
distance with a modulo : di,j = di - dj mod 4096. 
>> Thank you. These points have been noted and accommodated into the
revised version.
Some typos and other remarks:
- challanges
- "These are deemed to be consumer data because devices carried by
consumers routinely probe for a consumer service, specifically a Wi-Fi
connection. Monitoring the probes from such devices provides an
indication" This sentence is not clear. 
- "Though Wi-Fi F is a ‘location-less’ technology, ", please clarify
what you mean by that.
- "privacy infringement" may not be the best word as infrigement relate
to a law or a regulation. Privacy breach or leak may be a better choice.
- Wireshark and not WireShark. (** Bala suggest rephrase infringement
issue in terms of ‘disclosure’ or ‘possible identification of an
individual’)
- " We hypothesize that an adjustment factor could be arrived at for
each location of data collection, ""This calibration can be carried over
periodically and the frequency to improve the quality of the
estimation." something wrong in both sentences.
>> Thank you for picking up these minor lapses. All have been corrected
or clarified in the revised version of the paper.
Reviewer: 2
This paper addressed the data quality issue of Wi-Fi-based probe
requests in estimating pedestrian counts. The authors proposed several
methods to improve the accuracy of estimating the number of unique
mobile devices from a set of anonymized probe requests without revealing
their original device information.
>> This is correct, although the intended emphasis upon disclosure is a
feature rather than a principal motivation. We have also added further
discussion of how these principally technical issues relate to smart
city data infrastructure issues.

This is a crucial topic in mobile data uncertainty, and the manuscript
has the potential of becoming a useful reference in the field. However,
it was not organized effectively and missing many details in the
methodology.  Before addressing these problems, it is difficult to
assess the reliability and scientific merit of the case study.
>> Thank you very much for this endorsement of the motivation for our
paper. We hope that the following responses and the amendments to the
paper will allay your concerns about the methodology and application.

First, the literature review section adequately covered Wi-Fi-based
human activity studies, but it is in lack of an overview of modeling
human activity in the big data era. I would suggest the authors add an
overarching paragraph (or a sub-section) in Section 2 discussing the
importance and challenges of modeling human activities and urban
dynamics based on various types of big geodata, such as mobile phone
records, location-based social media, Bluetooth data, etc. 

>> This is a welcome comment, and we have added material in the
introduction and conclusion as to the value of new Big Data sources for
developing activity-based representations of behaviour and circumstances
in the smart city, This chimes with much of our related research, but we
write cognisant of the article length restrictions of IJGIS.
Second, the methodology should be better clarified. There are many
details missing or in need of a better justification. For example,
P4 l50, without providing any explanation, the authors hypothesized that
sequence number and length of the packet are sufficient to estimate the
number of unique devices. This argument was not elaborated until 2.5
pages later in section 3.2.
>> This material has now been amended and resequenced. (*Bala?)

P6 l27, please provide more information regarding how you defined the
threshold for low/high signal strength when eliminating the background
noise. This was also unclear in the case study on P8, where the authors
repeatedly mixed up classification and clustering. Neither k-means nor
hierarchical clustering is considered a “classification algorithm” as
claimed in p8 l26. Very few details were provided regarding the
parameter setting of these analyses.
>> Thank you. The reference to clustering has been amended. The
specifics of the thresholds used have been included, and the techniques
justified in more detail. (*Bala?)

P6 l30-31, in the phone shop example, the authors mentioned that it is
possible to identify background noise based on a sharp rise of the
request number; however, this will also eliminate the regular pedestrian
flow in that shop and cause additional inaccuracy. Please clarify.
>> Thank you. Clarified in the revised version. (*Bala please add
details here as well as in the text)

P7 l21, how often does the recycling of sequence number occur, and how
will this impact the reliability of your analysis? Please provide more
details.
>> Bala??

P7 Section 3.3, please be more specific about the calibration process
and the external source of information to be used here.
>> Bala??

P7 l45, the analysis in this research is based on one single sensor for
each location; however, in reality, it is very common to estimate travel
flows based on multiple sensors (e.g., nearby stores in a shopping
mall). How would your method address duplication in multiple sensors?
>> Bala feel free to amend as necessary… Our motivation is not to
attempt to track the movements of individuals, although we do attempt to
accommodate measurement variations attributable to micro-site location
of the sensors. In related work we have carried out controlled
comparison of sensor measures obtained from adjacent store locations,
and examined correspondence with retail unit function. This enables
identification of the differences in dwell time between, for example,
fast food outlets and clothes shops. This full analysis requires
addition of store till data and the analysis is detailed. For this
reason we include only a short reference to this extension of our
analysis here.

P10 l48, how was the adjustment factor determined?
>> Bala??

The conclusion did not address most of the important results from the
case study and should be expanded.
>> Yes, we agree, and some wider conclusions about the implications of
our research for better understanding the functioning of the smart city
have now been added.


Reviewer: 3
This paper presents Wi-Fi based footfall counting methodology, which is
timely and interesting topic. The method can be performed to estimate
human activity such as pedestrian footfall from Wi-Fi probe requests. 
>> Yes, thank you.

More specific comments can be found in the following. 
1. Minor formatting issues and typos needs to be fixed.
Figure 2, no value and units in the x-axis and y-axis.
Table 1, and Figure 4 are in wrong location.
>> Thank you. This has been corrected in the revised version of the
paper.

2.Related work 
-How about WiFi-based real-time data analytics?
>> We have included reference to such work in our extended discussion of
the relevance of the work to the smart cities discourse.

3.Methodology 
 - Will you draw a diagram of the Methodology?
>> We have resequenced some of the material in response to Referee 2
and, cognisant of over-all length requirements, think that this (rather
than a diagram) addresses your concerns.
4. Performance Analysis
-How about the performance for collecting data using PostgreSQL? Did you
compare Apache Flink and Spark Streaming for real-time data collecting? 
-How about the performance for different clustering methods in your
study？
>> Bala??
5.The reference list needs to be written in a standard format. Some
reference papers are lacking specific pages .Please use a standard way
of reference list.
>> Thank you. We have checked the reference list and think that it is
now standard and correct.
Some areas where I would like to see more detail:
1.It would have been interesting to understand the temporal
characteristics for a week pedestrian footfall. How to consider this
situation in your study? Why do you choose time range from 12:30 to
13:00 hrs ? 

>> Thank you. Our related work examines daily, weekly and seasonal
variation, and wil be the subject of future papers. (*Bala don’t get the
second point can you deal?)
2.Will you give more detail information about the data and the
parameters for various clustering algorithms? Including the number of
records, the number of clusters.

