1. Introduction

New and developing ‘smart’ technologies today provide the infrastructure
over which movements and interactions of people can be measured and
monitored in the ‘sentient city’ (Amin and Thrift 2017). This is making
it possible to reinvigorate conceptualise the city as the locus of human
activities, supplementing night time geographies of residence (Martin et
al 2015) with geographies of shopping behaviour (Lloyd and Cheshire
2018*), workzone geographies (Singleton and Longley 2018) and studies of
movement trajectories (Campbell et al 2008). This is rendering
activity-based conceptions of human behaviour central to analysis of
hardship and opportunity in and around the smart city (Venerandi et al
2015).

Sentient technologies include mobile phone networks, which can
triangulate user locations relative to networks of masts, use of GPS to
locate users of social media services, and Wi-Fi beacon connectivity to
access the Internet. These technologies offer differing levels of
spatial precision, where mobile telephony and Wi-Fi generally being less
reliable and offer lower precision than GPS to the end users, while
being more advantageous for broader mobility studies (Pinelli et al.
2015). There has been considerable research into the usefulness of these
technologies to understand patterns of movement in cities in near real
time (Candia et al. 2008, Gonzalez et al. 2008, Calabrese et al. 2013).
Most of this research has focused upon technical specification of
accuracy or precision (Song et al. 2010, Lane et al. 2010), with
somewhat less attention devoted to the ways that the characteristics of
the technologies and of their human users conspire to create possible
bias in representing usage patterns across the entire smart city. This
is

….

Change header 5 to ‘Case Study Implementation’

The methodology set out above is next implemented in five different
Central London locations at different times. Sensors are installed and
data collected for extended periods of time. We also carry out manual
counting at these locations across different times of the day. We then
apply the methodologies discussed earlier to arrive at estimated
pedestrian footfall and compare them with corresponding manual counts.
We finally evaluate the effectiveness of the processes with the Mean
Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE) at these locations and report our
findings.

….

6. Conclusion

Sentient technologies make possible measurement of the human activities
that are the life blood of the smart city. Yet the data that they
harvest are frequently relevant only to sub-groups within society that
avail themselves of particular goods and services – such as social media
applications, transport modes or retail offers. In each of these cases,
it is necessary to remember that the resulting data are a by-products of
consumer transactions, and will asa a consequence only pertain to users
of the relevant good or service. If the smart city is to be socially
inclusive, it therefore follows that sentient data must represent entire
populations, whether by design or by triangulation with external,
population wide, sources. This usually poses a non-trivial task, since
the ebbs and flows of smart device-enabled citizens rarely pertain to
any clearly defined population in either administrative or functional
terms (Massam 1973).

Our objective here has been to collect, rather than re-use, Big Data on
smart city functioning, by recording Wi-Fi probes and ultimately
reconciling them with manual counts in order to reconcile them with
ambient populations. The internal validation methodology set out in the
technical sections of this paper, allied to external validation from
pedestrian counts, renders the method inclusive and robust when
recording activity levels in retail centres in real time. We have
described the collection and processing of a novel consumer Big Dataset
that enables valid measures of levels of footfall activity which has
been scaled across a Great Britain wide network of sensors (CDRC 2016).
In both conceptual and technical terms, it illustrates the ways in which
passively collected consumer data can be ‘hardened’ to render them
robust and reliable by using related procedures of internal and external
validation.

Internal validation addresses the issues of screening out device probes
that do not indicate footfall, and the further screening of device
probes to ‘fingerprint’ the effects of MAC randomization.It is important
to note that the filtering process work based solely on the information
present in the probe requests and their temporal distribution. This
ensures that although the mobile devices were uniquely identified, there
was no further personal data generated by linking the probe requests to
the users of the mobile devices. This method essentially gave us a way
to estimate the footfall in real-time without identifying or tracking
the mobile devices themselves. External validation then entails
reconciling adjusted counts with the footfall observed at sample
locations. This procedure makes it possible to generalise from locations
at which manual footfall surveys are conducted to all others in the
system, and to develop a classification of device locations that are
more or less susceptible to noise generation.

This Wi-Fi based footfall counting methodology offers a large number of
applications and benefits for real time spatial analysis. Since Wi-Fi
based sensors are inexpensive and the data model is scalable, it is
possible to use this methodology for a large network of sensors to
gather granular data on pedestrian footfall. A snapshot showing week’s
worth of precise footfall in area around Charring cross, London is shown
in Figure 7 to demonstrate the potential for such dataset. Projects such
as SmartStreetSensors (CDRC 2016), may utilise this methodology to
overcome the challenges introduced by the implementation of MAC address
randomisation.

The vicissitudes of MAC randomisation, and the provisions of privacy
legislation such as EU General Data Protection Regulations mitigate
against tracking individuals across the smart city using this approach.
This can be modelled using agent-based methods (Heppenstall et al 2012),
however. In our own research we have also begun to link store
time-lagged till receipts to footfall, and have used such data to better
understand the dwell times that characterise such different retail uses
as stores with window displays and fast food restaurants. Such analysis
not only provides a more nuanced picture of movement through retail
areas, but also enables valorisation of micro sites within retail
centres. In the UK, for example, this is of immediate practical
importance in evaluating business rates on properties, and has still
wider implications for the setting of retail unit rental values. There
are obvious extensions to understanding the ebbs and flows of activities
in the 24 hour smart city.

More broadly still, extensions to this strand of smart city research are
likely to seek to differentiate the quality of different elements within
footfall, according to mission (e.g. travel to adjacent workplace zones,
leisure, etc.) and personal characteristics (such as spending power). In
this respect, future research may not only simulate linkage of
harmonised footfall counts between sensor locations, but also link these
in turn to disaggregate origin-destination matrices for bikeshare and
other public transport modes. Our own investigations will consider these
and other challenges to understanding the functioning of the sentient
city.

References

Lloyd and Cheshire – ask James, or just cite Alyson’s thesis

Singleton A D, Longley P A 2018. Developing new and hybrid
geodemographic classifications: London’s Workplace Zones. At APPLIED
GEOGRAPHY

[PDF] from researchgate.net

SFX@UCL - Fulltext

Transforming the social networking experience with sensing presence from
mobile phones

Authors

Andrew T Campbell, Shane B Eisenman, Kristíf Fodor, Nicholas D Lane,
Hong Lu, Emiliano Miluzzo, Mirco Musolesi, Ronald A Peterson, Xiao Zheng

2008

Conference

Proceedings of the 6th ACM conference on Embedded network sensor systems

Pages

367-368

Publisher

ACM

A. Venerandi, G. Quattrone, L. Capra, D. Quercia and D. Saez-Trumper.
"Measuring Urban Deprivation from User Generated Content". In 18th ACM
Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing
(CSCW 2015). Vancouver, BC, Canada. March 2015.

Martin, D., Cockings, S., & Leung, S. (2015). Developing a flexible
framework for spatiotemporal population modeling. _Annals of the
Association of American Geographers_, _105_(4), 754-772.
DOI: 10.1080/00045608.2015.1022089

Massam B 1973. Location and Space in Social Administration. Harlow,
Longman.

Agent-Based Models of Geographical Systems

Editors: Heppenstall, A.J., Crooks, A.T., See, L.M., Batty, M. (Eds.)
2012, Springer, Heidelberg
